Add blog post with tips on successful projects (#93)
x-govuk/x-govuk.github.io: app/posts/creating-successful-govuk-tools.md

---
title: Successfully creating tools to help build GOV.UK services
description: Thoughts on what it takes to make something other teams will use
date: 2024-01-16
author:
  name: Peter Yates
  url: https://github.com/peteryates
image:
  src: /assets/posts/creating-successful-govuk-tools/illustration.png
  alt: Red ruby gemstone, with multiple colours bursting out from behind.
  opengraphImage: true
---

I joined the [Get School Experience](https://schoolexperience.education.gov.uk/) team in 2019 and it was my first role in a government department. Our biggest challenge was to work out how to build a multi-page form and I was surprised there wasn't already an established pattern. There wasn't even a [Simple Form](https://github.com/heartcombo/simple_form) config.

> Despite only having worked in DfE Digital for a few weeks I'd seen just how important collaboration was. I remember how refreshing it was that working collaboratively was the default, and that was reinforced by [point 13 of The GOV.UK Service Manual](https://www.gov.uk/service-manual/service-standard/point-13-use-common-standards-components-patterns).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Despite only having worked in DfE Digital for a few weeks I'd seen just how important collaboration was. I remember how refreshing it was that working collaboratively was the default, and that was reinforced by [point 13 of The GOV.UK Service Manual](https://www.gov.uk/service-manual/service-standard/point-13-use-common-standards-components-patterns):
```

I'd found a gap. Something I thought should exist but didn't. Something I was certain others would find useful. Something I thought I could do.

I decided to have a go at building and sharing a form builder and spent my free time over the next month working on it. I announced it [via a very nervous-sounding YouTube screencast](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PhoFZ0qXAlA) and, thankfully, it was well received.

It was my first time building and publishing a library before, but having used plenty I had a good idea of what to prioritise if I wanted to make it a success. Here's my list:

### 1. Active development

Unmaintained repositories are likely to become a burden, and might even hold you back from upgrading your application. It's a huge red flag. Even if new features aren't constantly being added, keeping on top of dependencies and making sure the documentation is up to date will give visitors to your project's page some confidence it's being looked after.

### 2. A responsive maintainer

Knowing there's someone who will respond to queries on Slack, fix bugs and keep the library up to date and in sync with the design system is a must.

### 3. An intuitive design

> There was already a reference implementation written in [Nunjucks](https://mozilla.github.io/nunjucks/) that would provide inspiration but this had to feel like Rails. We use blocks instead of strings of HTML, we use `snake_case` instead of `camelCase`. If the ergonomics weren't right developers wouldn't use it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There was already a reference implementation written in [Nunjucks](https://mozilla.github.io/nunjucks/) that would provide inspiration but this had to feel like Rails. We use blocks instead of strings of HTML, we use `snake_case` instead of `camelCase`. If the ergonomics weren't right, developers wouldn't use it.
```

### 6. Encouraging contributions

This is a big one, but no library author is able to predict what teams will need. Ensuring the codebase is clean, tidy and well tested makes the process of contributing easier.

Contributions aren't always fully-fledged pull requests, feature requests count too and they've helped make the libraries more useful for everyone.

So far, nearly all suggestions made have been accommodated.

### 7. Getting real users

I was incredibly lucky that the team building [Apply for teacher training](https://www.gov.uk/apply-for-teacher-training) were just getting started when I launched the form builder. It's one of the Department for Education's flagship projects and if they are confident enough to use it hopefully others would be too.

Real users find real bugs and limitations, it's crucial in taking your hobby project to the next level.

## What's left to build?

> I'm most familiar with the Rails ecosystem for building GOV.UK services and many of the building blocks you'll need for most services are catered for. You can:

Author: ```suggestion
I'm most familiar with the Rails ecosystem for building GOV.UK services and many of the building blocks you'll need for your service already exist. You can:
```

I remember how refreshing it felt to join an organisation where working collaboratively wasn't just encouraged, it was the default. It's even baked into the service standard:

> If you develop your own patterns or components, share them publicly so others can use them.
>
> <cite>[The GOV.UK Service Standard, point 13.](https://www.gov.uk/service-manual/service-standard/point-13-use-common-standards-components-patterns)</cite>

My first job on the project was to work out how we were going capture all the information from applicants. We knew we were going to be using the newly-released GOV.UK Design System, and because Rails was popular across government we thought there would be established tools we could lean on.

Forms are the main part of any transactional service, and Rails makes creating forms really straightforward. There must be something out there that combines the two.

> Unfortunately, there wasn't. We had a really tight deadline so repurposing the [Ministry of Justice's GOV.UK Elements form builder](https://github.com/ministryofjustice/govuk_elements_form_builder) for the GOV.UK Design System. It worked for us but never felt quite right.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Unfortunately, there wasn't. We had a really tight deadline so repurposed the [Ministry of Justice's GOV.UK Elements form builder](https://github.com/ministryofjustice/govuk_elements_form_builder) for the GOV.UK Design System. It worked for us but never felt quite right.
```

> Unfortunately, there wasn't. We had a really tight deadline so repurposing the [Ministry of Justice's GOV.UK Elements form builder](https://github.com/ministryofjustice/govuk_elements_form_builder) for the GOV.UK Design System. It worked for us but never felt quite right.

Reviewer: It’s not clear here what wasn’t right about the MOJ one. Can you spell it out?

But, I'd found a gap. Something I thought should exist but didn't. Something I was certain others would find useful. Something I thought I could do.

I decided to have a go at building and sharing a form builder from scratch and spent my free time over the next month working on it. I announced it [via a very nervous-sounding YouTube screencast](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PhoFZ0qXAlA) and, thankfully, it was well received.

> It was my first time building and publishing a library before, but having used plenty I had a good idea of what to prioritise if I wanted to make it a success. For me at the time, success meant a other teams finding it useful enough to use. Here's my list:

Reviewer: Maybe before you go into the list you could briefly summarise how successful your library has been? Feel like you almost undersell it here!

Author: I think I've done this now

Contributions aren't always fully-fledged pull requests, feature requests count too and they've helped make the libraries more useful for everyone.

So far, nearly all suggestions made have been accommodated.

### 7. Getting real users

I was incredibly lucky that the team building [Apply for teacher training](https://www.gov.uk/apply-for-teacher-training) were just getting started when I launched the form builder. It's one of the Department for Education's flagship projects and if they are confident enough to use it hopefully others would be too.

Real users find real bugs and limitations, it's crucial in taking your hobby project to the next level.

## What's left to build?

I'm most familiar with the Rails ecosystem for building GOV.UK services and many of the building blocks you'll need already exist. You can:

- render content with [govuk_markdown](https://github.com/DFE-Digital/govuk-markdown)
- provide accessible autocompletion for fields with [dfe-autocomplete](https://github.com/DFE-Digital/dfe-autocomplete/)

> - easily write tests that make sure your service is workign properly with [govuk-rspec-helpers](https://x-govuk.github.io/govuk-rspec-helpers/)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- easily write tests that make sure your service is working properly with [govuk-rspec-helpers](https://x-govuk.github.io/govuk-rspec-helpers/)
```
